Update testing chapter (#777)
hadley/r-pkgs: Testing.Rmd

This allows testthat to continue to evolve and improve without breaking historical packages that are in a rather passive maintenance phase.
You can learn more in the [testthat 3e article](https://testthat.r-lib.org/articles/third-edition.html).

We recommend testthat 3e for all new packages and we recommend updating existing, actively maintained packages to use testthat 3e.
Unless we say otherwise, this chapter describes testthat 3e.

## Test mechanics and workflow

### Initial setup

To setup your package to use testthat, run:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
usethis::use_testthat(3)
```

This will:

1.  Create a `tests/testthat/` directory.

1.  Add testthat to the `Suggests` field in the `DESCRIPTION`.
    Specify testthat 3e in the `Config/testthat/edition` field.
    Here are what the relevant `DESCRIPTION` fields might look like:
    
    Suggests: testthat (>= 3.0.0)
    Config/testthat/edition: 3

1.  Create a file `tests/testthat.R` that runs all your tests when
    `R CMD check` runs. (You'll learn more about that in 
    [automated checking](#r-cmd-check).)
    
This initial setup is something you do once per package.

> The `tests/testthat.R` script is something you should generally regard as fixed.

Reviewer: I think you could be ever stronger. "DON'T TOUCH THIS"

It is run during `R CMD check` (and, therefore, `devtools::check()`), but is not used in other test-running scenarios (such as `devtools::test()` or `devtools::test_active_file()`).
If you want to do something that affects all of your tests, there is usually a better mechanism than modifying the standard `tests/testthat.R` script.
You'll see this below when we discuss different types of test helpers and mechanisms for setup / teardown.

### Create a test

As you define functions in your package, in the files below `R/`, you add the corresponding tests to `.R` files in `tests/testthat/`.

> We recommend that the organisation of test files match the organisation of `R/` files, discussed in section \@ref(code-organising):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We strongly recommend that the organisation of test files match the organisation of `R/` files, discussed in section \@ref(code-organising):
```

In the testthat 3e, `context()` is formally deprecated; you should just remove it.
Once you adopt an intentional, synchronised approach to the organisation of files below `R/` and `tests/testthat/`, the necessary contextual information is right there in the file name, rendering the legacy `context()` superfluous.

usethis offers a helpful pair of functions for creating or toggling between files:

* `usethis::use_r()`
* `usethis::use_test()`

Either one can be called with a file (base) name, in order to create a file *de novo* and open it for editing:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
use_r("foofy")    # creates and opens R/foofy.R
use_test("blarg") # creates and opens tests/testthat/test-blarg.R
```

The `use_r()` / `use_test()` duo has some convenience features that make them "just work" in many common situations:

* When determining the target file, they can deal with the presence or absence
  of the `.R` extension and the `test-` prefix.
  - Equivalent: `use_r("foofy.R")`, `use_r("foofy")`
  - Equivalent: `use_test("test-blarg.R")`, `use_test("blarg.R")`, `use_test("blarg")`
* If the target file already exists, it is opened for editing. Otherwise, the

>   target is created and then opened for editing.

Reviewer: It feels like this might be just a bit much detail.

**Micro-iteration**: This is the interactive phase where you initiate and refine a function and its tests in tandem.
Here you will run `load_all()` often, and then execute individual expectations or whole tests interactively in the console.
Note that `load_all()` attaches testthat, so it puts you in the perfect position to test drive your functions and to execute individual tests and expectations.

```{r, eval = FALSE}
# tweak the foofy() function and re-load it
devtools::load_all()

# interactively explore and refine expectations and tests
expect_equal(foofy(...), EXPECTED_FOOFY_OUTPUT)

testthat("foofy does good things", {...})
```

**Mezzo-iteration**: As one file's-worth of functions and their associated tests start to shape up, you will want to execute the entire file of associated tests, perhaps with `testthat::test_file()`:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
testthat::test_file("tests/testthat/test-foofy.R")
```

:::rstudio-tip
In RStudio, you don't even have to specify the full filepath!
`devtools::test_active_file()` infers the target test file from the file you are actively editing, similar to how `use_r()` and `use_test()` work.

> The easiest way to invoke this is via "Run a test file" in the Addins menu or with the keyboard shortcut Ctrl/Cmd + T.

Reviewer: You do need to set up that keyboard shortcut yourself

    `expected`: "0.0.0.9000"

Each failure gives a description of the test (e.g., "get_release_data() works if no file found"), its location (e.g., "test-release.R:108:3"), and the reason for the failure (e.g., "res$Version (`actual`) not equal to "0.0.0.9000" (`expected`)").

The idea is that you'll modify your code (either the functions defined below `R/` or the tests in `tests/testthat/`) until all tests are passing.

## Test structure {#test-structure}

A test file lives in `tests/testthat/`.
Its name must start with `test`.
We will inspect and execute a test file from the stringr package.

> But first, for the purposes of rendering this book, we must attach stringr and testthat.

Reviewer: Should we add a block that is "we're running this code so the book work, but you should never do this"?

Author: https://github.com/hadley/r-pkgs/issues/778

```{r}
library(testthat)
library(stringr)
local_edition(3)
```

Here are the contents of `tests/testthat/test-dup.r` from stringr[^dev-stringr]:

[^dev-stringr]: Note that we are building the book against a dev version of stringr.

```{r}
test_that("basic duplication works", {
  expect_equal(str_dup("a", 3), "aaa")
  expect_equal(str_dup("abc", 2), "abcabc")
  expect_equal(str_dup(c("a", "b"), 2), c("aa", "bb"))
  expect_equal(str_dup(c("a", "b"), c(2, 3)), c("aa", "bbb"))
})

test_that("0 duplicates equals empty string", {
  expect_equal(str_dup("a", 0), "")
  expect_equal(str_dup(c("a", "b"), 0), rep("", 2))
})

test_that("uses tidyverse recycling rules", {
  expect_error(str_dup(1:2, 1:3), class = "vctrs_error_incompatible_size")
})
```

This file shows a typical mix of tests:

* "basic duplication works" tests typical usage of `str_dup()`.
* "0 duplicates equals empty string" probes a specific edge case.
* "uses tidyverse recycling rules" checks that malformed input results in a
  specific kind of error.

Tests are organised hierarchically:
__expectations__ are grouped into __tests__ which are organised in __files__:

* A __file__ holds multiple related tests.

>   In this example, the file `tests/testthat/test-dup.r` has all of the tests
>   for `stringr::str_dup()`, which is defined in `R/dup.r`.
>   A test failure is always reported by file name, which is why the file name
>   should convey the general context, e.g. the function that is being tested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In this example, the file `tests/testthat/test-dup.r` has all of the tests
  for the code in `R/dup.r`.
```

Snapshot tests are a great solution to this problem and this is one of the main innovations in testthat 3e.
The basic idea is that you record the expected result in a separate, human-readable file.
Going forward, testthat alerts you when a newly computed result differs from the previously recorded snapshot.
Snapshot tests are particularly suited to monitoring your package's user interface, such as its informational messages and errors.
Other use cases include testing images or other complicated objects.

We'll illustrate snapshot tests using the waldo package.
Under the hood, testthat 3e uses waldo to do the heavy lifting of "actual vs. expected" comparisons, so it's good for you to know a bit about waldo anyway.
One of waldo's main design goals is to present differences in a clear and actionable manner, as opposed to a frustrating declaration that "this differs from that and I know exactly how, but I won't tell you".
Therefore, the formatting of output from `waldo::compare()` is very intentional and is well-suited to a snapshot test.
The binary outcome of `TRUE` (actual == expected) vs. `FALSE` (actual != expected) is fairly easy to check and could get its own test.

> Here we're concerned with writing a test to ensure that differences are reported to the user in the intended way.

Reviewer 2: I'd have expected (:wink: ) an example maybe of printing the temperature hot/cold with emojis, to build upon the package of "the package within"

  know about, but it does not signal an actual defect.
* `error = FALSE`: By default, snapshot code is *not* allowed to throw an error.
  See `expect_error()`, described above, for one approach to testing errors.
  But sometimes you want to assess "Does this error message make sense to a
  human?" and having it laid out in context in a snapshot is a great way to see
  it with fresh eyes.
  Specify `error = TRUE` in this case:
  
    ```{r eval = FALSE}
    expect_snapshot(error = TRUE,
      str_dup(1:2, 1:3)
    )
    ```
  
* `transform`: Sometimes a snapshot contains volatile, insignificant elements,
  such as a temporary filepath or a timestamp.
  The `transform` argument accepts a function, presumably written by you, to
  remove or replace such changeable text.
  Another use of `transform` is to scrub sensitive information from the
  snapshot.
* `variant`: Sometimes snapshots reflect the ambient conditions, such as the
  operating system or the version of R or one of your dependencies, and you need
  a different snapshot for each variant. This is an experimental and somewhat
  advanced feature, so if you can arrange things to use a single snapshot, you
  probably should.
  

> In typical usage, testthat will take care of managing the snapshot files below `tests/testthat/_snaps/`.

Reviewer 2: Ok so actually should you document the workflow for when one gets a snapshot failure and needs to fix it? (earlier when explaining snapshot failures)

- I sometimes delete the new one
- I sometimes accept it and reverse the change from the git tab

  needs to match.
  Read the `expect_match()` documentation to see how additional arguments, like
  `ignore.case = FALSE` or `fixed = TRUE`, can be passed down to `grepl()`.
   
    ```{r, error = TRUE}
    string <- "Testing is fun!"
  
    expect_match(string, "Testing") 
     
    # Fails, match is case-sensitive
    expect_match(string, "testing")
  
    # Passes because additional arguments are passed to grepl():
    expect_match(string, "testing", ignore.case = TRUE)
    ```
* `expect_length(object, n)` is a shortcut for
  `expect_equal(length(object), n)`.
* `expect_setequal(x, y)` tests that every element of `x` occurs in `y`, and
  that every element of `y` occurs in `x`.
  But it won't fail if `x` and `y` happen to have their elements in a different
  order.
* `expect_s3_class()` and `expect_s4_class()` check that an object `inherit()`s
  from a specified class. `expect_type()`checks the `typeof()` an object.

    ```{r, error = TRUE}
    model <- lm(mpg ~ wt, data = mtcars)
    expect_s3_class(model, "lm")
    expect_s3_class(model, "glm")
    ```

`expect_true()` and `expect_false()` are useful catchalls if none of the other expectations does what you need.

> ## What to test

Reviewer 2: below there is some "I" in an item

Reviewer 2: reg writing test when there is a bug, maybe add a footnote about reprex, not really on topic but I was thinking about the bliss when an user gives a reprex, you put it in a test, you fix the code then close the issue

* They start with `expect_`.

* They have two main arguments:
  the first is the actual result, the second is what you expect.
  
* If the actual and expected results don't agree, testthat throws an error.

* Some expectations have additional arguments that control the finer points of
  comparing an actual and expected result.

While you'll normally put expectations inside tests inside files, you can also run them directly.
This makes it easy to explore expectations interactively.
There are more than 40 expectations in the testthat package, which can be explored in testthat's [reference index](https://testthat.r-lib.org/reference/index.html).
Here we highlight some of the most important expectations.

* There are two basic ways to test for equality: `expect_equal()`, and
  `expect_identical()`.
  `expect_equal()` is the most commonly used and should be your default:
  it checks for equality within a numerical tolerance:

    ```{r, error = TRUE}
    expect_equal(10, 10)
    expect_equal(10, 10L)
    expect_equal(10, 10 + 1e-7)
    expect_equal(10, 11)
    ```
  

>   If you want to test for exact equivalence or need to compare more exotic
>   objects like environments, use `expect_identical()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If you want to test for exact equivalence, use `expect_identical()`.
```

    ```{r, error = TRUE}
    expect_equal(10, 10 + 1e-7)
    expect_identical(10, 10 + 1e-7)
    expect_equal(2, 2L)
    expect_identical(2, 2L)
    ```

> * `expect_match()` matches a character vector against a regular expression. 

Reviewer: I think this should come later or maybe not at all?

Maybe there should be (or already is) a section that lists a bunch of shortcuts, e,g:

* `expect_length(x, n)` is a short cut for `expect_equal(length(x), n)`
* `expect_match(x, pattern)` is a shortcut for `expect_true(all(grepl(pattern, n)))` 

etc

   The optional `all` argument controls whether all elements or just one 
   element needs to match.
   This is powered by `grepl()` and additional arguments like
   `ignore.case = FALSE` or `fixed = TRUE` are passed on down.
   
    ```{r, error = TRUE}
    string <- "Testing is fun!"
  
    expect_match(string, "Testing") 
     
    # Fails, match is case-sensitive
    expect_match(string, "testing")
  
    # Passes because additional arguments are passed to grepl():
    expect_match(string, "testing", ignore.case = TRUE)
    ```

> * `expect_s3_class()` and `expect_s4_class()` check that an object `inherit()`s

Reviewer: I think `expect_equal()` + `expect_error()` (and friends) and `expect_snapshot()` are by far the most important and should come first.

```

followed by a preview of the snapshot output.

This reminds you that snapshot tests only function when executed non-interactively, i.e. while running an entire test file or the entire test suite.
This applies both to recording snapshots and to checking them.

The first time this test is executed via `devtools::test()` or similar, you'll see something like this (assume the test is in `tests/testthat/test-diff.R`):

```
── Warning (test-diff.R:63:3): side-by-side diffs work ─────────────────────
Adding new snapshot:
Code
  waldo::compare(c(
    "X", letters), c(
    letters, "X"))
Output
      old | new    
  [1] "X" -        
  [2] "a" | "a" [1]
  [3] "b" | "b" [2]
  [4] "c" | "c" [3]
  
       old | new     
  [25] "x" | "x" [24]
  [26] "y" | "y" [25]
  [27] "z" | "z" [26]
           - "X" [27]
```

There is always a warning upon initial snapshot creation.
The snapshot is added to `tests/testthat/_snaps/diff.md`, under the heading "side-by-side diffs work", which comes from the test's description.
The snapshot looks exactly like what a user sees interactively in the console, which is the experience we want to check for.

> The snapshot file is *also* very readable, which is pleasant for the package developer.

Reviewer: Some comment/footnote about PRs here

Here's a toy example to make things concrete.

```{r}
test_that("multiplication works", {
  useful_thing <- 3
  expect_equal(2 * useful_thing, 6)
})

test_that("subtraction works", {
  useful_thing <- 3
  expect_equal(5 - useful_thing, 2)
})
```

In real life, `useful_thing` is usually a more complicated object that somehow feels burdensome to instantiate.
Notice how `useful_thing <- 3` appears in more than once place.
Conventional wisdom says we should DRY this code out.
It's tempting to just move `useful_thing`'s definition outside of the tests:

```{r}
useful_thing <- 3

test_that("multiplication works", {
  expect_equal(2 * useful_thing, 6)
})

test_that("subtraction works", {
  expect_equal(5 - useful_thing, 2)
})
```

This does sort of work, because when `useful_thing` is not found in the test-specific environment, the search continues in the parent environment, where `useful_thing` will often be found.
When testthat executes an entire test file, `useful_thing` will get defined and made available for subsequent tests in that file.

> However, during interactive development, there is no gesture to systematically identify and execute such code.

Reviewer: This is particularly frustrating when the test at line 573 is failing and all the setup code is at line 1.  Or worse when it depends on code smooshed between two other tests at some random location that made sense at the time you wrotei t.

> Top-level code, outside of any test, is in a sort of No Man's Land and the tests relying on it work more by coincidence, than by definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Top-level code, outside of any test, is in a sort of No Man's Land: it's fine when your tests are all passing, but when something goes wrong and a test fails you now have to encounter a bunch of extra pain when it need the least.
```

The classic application of mocking is in the context of a package that wraps an external API.
In order to test your functions, technically you need to make a live call to that API to get a response, which you then process.
But what if that API requires authentication or what if it's somewhat flaky and has occasional downtime?
It can be more productive to just *pretend* to call the API but, instead, to test the code under your control by processing a pre-recorded response from the actual API.

Our main advice about mocking is to avoid it if you can.
This is not an indictment of mocking, but just a realistic assessment that mocking introduces new complexity that is not always justified by the payoffs.

Since most R packages do not need full-fledged mocking, we do not cover it here.
Instead we'll point you to the packages that represent the state-of-the-art for mocking in R today:

* mockery: <https://github.com/r-lib/mockery>
* mockr: <https://krlmlr.github.io/mockr/>
* httptest: <https://enpiar.com/r/httptest/>
* httptest2: <https://enpiar.com/httptest2/>

> * webfakes: <https://webfakes.r-lib.org>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* webfakes: <https://webfakes.r-lib.org>
* dittodb: <https://docs.ropensci.org/dittodb/>
```

Don't worry, you're not!
Testing presents many unique challenges and maneuvers, which tend to get much less air time in programming communities than strategies for writing the "main code", i.e. the stuff below `R/`.
As a result, it requires more deliberate effort to develop your skills and taste around testing.

Anecdotally, it seems like many new R package developers fall back to habits from data analysis code, when writing tests.
To a certain extent, this is natural, since your tests need to exercise the functions in your package by doing real tasks.
The code *inside each `test_that()` call* should be very procedural.
But at the next level of organisation, i.e. a file with multiple tests or a folder with many test files, the step-by-step script mentality can lead you astray.

Recall this advice found in section \@ref(code-r-landscape), which covers your package's "main code", i.e. everything below `R/`:

> The `.R` files below `R/` should consist almost entirely of function definitions.
> Any other top-level code is suspicious and should be carefully reviewed for possible conversion into a function.

> We have analogous advice for your "testing code", i.e. everything in `tests/testthat/test-*.R` files:

Reviewer 2: are there linters for this :thinking:

> The `test-*.R` file below `tests/testthat/` should consist almost entirely of calls to `test_that()`.
> Any other top-level code is suspicious and should be carefully reviewed for conversion to a more official method of achieving its goal, such as using functions or data objects defined in your package or relocating logic to special testthat files, such as `helper.R` or `setup.R`.

```{r, eval = FALSE}
# sometimes people put top-level code here, but it's a good idea to avoid this
# when you can

test_that("foofy() does this", { ... })

test_that("foofy() does that", { ... })

# it's even more problematic to have top-level code in the MIDDLE of a test file
#
# such code only affects *part* of your test file
#
# this code is hard to discover and run when troubleshooting

test_that("foofy() does the other thing", { ... })
```

Keep reading for various alternatives that are better than having top-level code in your test files other than calls to `test_that()`.

> ### Test hygiene

Reviewer 2: One question here! Also related to refactoring code.

I somewhat often use the pattern

```r
is_bla <- function() {
 if (nzchar(Sys.getenv("PACKAGE_BLA_MOCK")) {
    return(FALSE)
}
  # actual code checking bla
}

```

to have a switch for testing for things such as installed packages, internet connection. Is this... good? bad?

In the testing domain, this is sometimes referred to as *setup and teardown* and we'll describe several official testthat ways to do this, at various scopes.

### Self-sufficient, self-contained tests

> Remember that tests are often revisited only when something breaks
> When you are called to fix a broken test that you have never seen before, you will be thankful someone took the time to make it easy to understand.
> Code is read far more than it is written, so make sure you write the test you’d like to read!
> 
> From the book Software Engineering at Google, [Chapter 11](https://abseil.io/resources/swe-book/html/ch11.html)

*Most of us don't work on a code base the size of Google. But even in a team of one, tests that you wrote six months ago might as well have been written by someone else. Especially when they suddenly start failing.*

It's hard to beat the pure simplicity and obviousness of a test that creates the conditions it needs, then puts things back as they were.
You've already seen an example of this, when we explored snapshot tests:

```{r eval = FALSE}
test_that("side-by-side diffs work", {

>   withr::local_options(width = 20)             # <-- (°_°) look here!

Reviewer 2: does this sound ok with a screenreader?

When testthat executes an entire test file, `useful_thing` will be defined and made available for subsequent tests in that file.
However, during interactive development, there is no gesture to systematically identify and execute such code.
This is particularly frustrating when the failing test starts on line 573 and all the implicit setup code is at line 1.
Or, even worse, the setup is sprinkled around the file between tests, at random locations that made sense at the time you wrote it.

> In its purest form, automating testing consists of three activities: writing tests, running tests, and **reacting to test failures**.
> 
> From the book Software Engineering at Google, [Chapter 11](https://abseil.io/resources/swe-book/html/ch11.html)

Top-level code, outside of any test, is in a sort of No Man's Land:
it's fine when your tests are all passing, but when something goes wrong and a test fails, now you have to endure extra self-inflicted pain when you least need it.
This is the sort of practice that feels convenient when *writing tests*, but proves to be extremely inconvenient when you are *failing tests*.
Below we recommend various robust and structured solutions to this problem.

> But first, seriously consider inlining the creation of a `useful_thing` whenever you need it.

Reviewer 2: why not mention here the idea to make its creation a function defined centrally, if creating it takes too much space?

  different pieces of your testing suite and adds mystery when you least need
  it: when you're trying to figure out why tests are failing.

What should you do instead?
When working on your tests, use `devtools::load_all()`, just like you do when working below `R/`.
By default, `load_all()` does all of these things:

* Simulates re-building, re-installing, and re-loading your package.
* Makes everything in your package's namespace available, including unexported
  functions and objects and anything you've imported from another package.
* Attaches testthat, i.e. does `library(testthat)`.
* Runs test helper files, i.e. executes `test/testthat/helper.R`.

This eliminates the need for any `library()` calls below `tests/testthat/`, for the vast majority of R packages.
Any instance of `library(testthat)` is clearly no longer necessary.
Likewise, any instance of attaching one of your dependencies via `library(somePkg)` is unnecessary.
In your tests, if you need to call functions from somePkg, do it just as you do below `R/`.
If you have imported the function into your namespace, use `fun()`.
If you have not, use `somePkg::fun()`.

> It's fair to say that `library(somePkg)` in the tests should be about as rare as taking a dependency via `Depends`, i.e. there is usually a better alternative.

Reviewer 2: link to metadata chapter?

Test toubleshooting nirvana looks like this:
In a fresh R sesion, you can do `devtools::load_all()` and immediately run an individual test or walk through it line-by-line.
There is no need to hunt around for code that has to be run first, that is found elsewhere in the test file or in a different file altogether (i.e. some file that is not executed by `load_all()`).

One other function that basically should never appear below `tests/testhat/` is `source()`.
There are several special files with an official role in testthat workflows (see below), not to mention the entire R package machinery, that provide better ways to make functions, objects, and other logic available in your tests.

> ## Files relevant to testing  {#tests-files-overview}

Reviewer 2: unsurprisingly I am thinking about my blog post table which is my mental model :grin:

#> 
#> 🥳
```

Something like `skip_if_no_api()` is likely to appear many times in your test suite.
This is another occasion where it is tempting to DRY things out, by hoisting the `skip()` to the top-level of the file.
However, we still lean towards calling `skip_if_no_api()` in each test where it's needed. 

```{r eval = FALSE}
# we prefer this:
test_that("foo api returns bar when given baz", {
  skip_if_no_api()
  ...
})

test_that("foo api returns an errors when given qux", {
  skip_if_no_api()
  ...
})

# over this:
skip_if_no_api()

test_that("foo api returns bar when given baz", {...})

test_that("foo api returns an errors when given qux", {...})
```

Within the realm of top-level code in test files, having a `skip()` at the very beginning of a test file is one of the more benign situations.
But once a test file does not fit entirely on your screen, it creates an implicit yet easy-to-miss connection between the `skip()` and individual tests.

#### Built-in `skip()` functions

Similar to testthat's built-in expectations, there is a family of `skip()` functions that anticipate some common situations.
These functions often relieve you of the need to write a custom skipper.

> Here are some examples of the most useful `skip()` functions:

Reviewer 2: state that the offline one also skips on CRAN from a certain testthat version?

Usually we are mocking an external service, such as a REST API, or a function that reports something about session state, such as whether the session is interactive.

The classic application of mocking is in the context of a package that wraps an external API.
In order to test your functions, technically you need to make a live call to that API to get a response, which you then process.
But what if that API requires authentication or what if it's somewhat flaky and has occasional downtime?
It can be more productive to just *pretend* to call the API but, instead, to test the code under your control by processing a pre-recorded response from the actual API.

Our main advice about mocking is to avoid it if you can.
This is not an indictment of mocking, but just a realistic assessment that mocking introduces new complexity that is not always justified by the payoffs.

Since most R packages do not need full-fledged mocking, we do not cover it here.
Instead we'll point you to the packages that represent the state-of-the-art for mocking in R today:

* mockery: <https://github.com/r-lib/mockery>
* mockr: <https://krlmlr.github.io/mockr/>

> * httptest: <https://enpiar.com/r/httptest/>

Reviewer 2: more plugging! demo of httptest https://books.ropensci.org/http-testing/httptest.html

you should add httptest2 as well, and maybe webfakes even if it is not mocking stricto sensu

To do that, you can use the `skip()` function - rather than throwing an error it simply prints an `S` in the output.

```{r, eval = FALSE}
skip_if_no_api() <- function() {
  if (api_unavailable()) {
    skip("API not available")
  }
}

test_that("foo api returns bar when given baz", {
  skip_if_no_api()
  ...
})
```

The custom skipper `skip_if_no_api()` is a yet another example of a test helper and the advice already given about where to define it applies here too.
Likewise, we lean towards calling `skip_if_no_api()` in each test where it's needed, even though this might lead to repetition.
This is another type of call that is tempting to hoist to the top-level of a test file:

```{r eval = FALSE}
skip_if_no_api()

test_that("foo api returns bar when given baz", {...})

test_that("foo api returns an errors when given qux", {...})
```

We have mixed feelings about this practice.
Within the realm of top-level code in test files, this is probably on the "more acceptable" / "least offensive" end.
But once a test file does not fit entirely on your screen, it creates an implicit yet easy-to-miss connection between the skip(s) and individual tests.

> At the complete other extreme, another practice that can make sense in very specific situations is to build a `skip()` directly into a package function.

Reviewer: Would be better in https://testthat.r-lib.org/articles/skipping.html, I think.

`testthat::is_testing()` is a small convenience function that checks the value of the `TESTTHAT` environment variable, which will be true when testthat is running tests:

```{r eval = FALSE}
is_testing <- function() {
  identical(Sys.getenv("TESTTHAT"), "true")
}
```

You usually want to avoid a runtime dependency on testthat, i.e. you won't want to use testthat in the code below `R/`.
In that case, you should inline the source of `is_testing()` into your package, in whatever location you are using for any other test helper functions.

<!-- Of course, the example above actually DOES have a runtime dependency on testthat, because of the call to `testthat::skip()`.

So pkgdown might as well call `testthat::is_testing(), instead of inlining it.

pkgdown lists testthat in Suggests, not Imports, so that is also interesting to me. Hmmm.
-->

Advantages of the embedded `skip()` approach: Feels elegant and concise.

Disadvantages of this approach: Seems to violate "Good production code is well-factored; good test code is obvious", i.e. when you're focused on the tests, the existence of this skip is easy to miss.

> <!-- I want to talk about the danger of skipping, i.e. when you think everything's "green", but actually you're not running any / many tests, because some pre-condition is not met. -->

Reviewer: One challenge with skips is that they are currently completely invisible — if you automatically skip too many tests it's easy to fool yourself that all your tests are passing when in fact they're just being skipped. In an ideal world, your CI/CD would make it easy to see how many tests are being skipped and how that changes over time. 

Good practice to actually dig into the R CMD check results and look at the test results and make sure the skips are as you expect. But this tends to be something you have to learn through experience.

### Building your own testing tools

> <!--

Reviewer: Counter-proposal: all this code goes into a testthat vignette, and instead focus on a hyperlocal function. Here's an example from stringr:

```R
test_that("truncations work for all sides", {

  trunc <- function(direction) str_trunc(
    "This string is moderately long",
    direction,
    width = 20
  )

  expect_equal(trunc("right"),   "This string is mo...")
  expect_equal(trunc("left"),    "...s moderately long")
  expect_equal(trunc("center"),  "This stri...ely long")
})
```

Reviewer: ```R
test_that("can fill in missing cells", {
  df <- tibble(g = c(1, 2), var = c("x", "y"), val = c(1, 2))

  widen <- function(...) {
    df %>% pivot_wider(names_from = var, values_from = val, ...)
  }

  expect_equal(widen()$x, c(1, NA))
  expect_equal(widen(values_fill = 0)$x, c(1, 0))
  expect_equal(widen(values_fill = list(val = 0))$x, c(1, 0))
})
```

Readable tests give you more confidence that they're correct.

```{r error = TRUE}
test_that("floor_date works for different units", {
  as_time <- function(x) as.POSIXct(x, tz = "UTC")
  
  expect_floor_old_skool <- function(unit, time) {
    eval(bquote(expect_equal(floor_date(base, .(unit)), as_time(.(time)))))
  }
  
  base <- as_time("2009-08-03 12:01:59.23")
  expect_floor_old_skool("second", "2009-08-03 12:01:59")
  expect_floor_old_skool("minute", "2009-08-03 12:01:00")
  expect_floor_old_skool("hour",   "2009-08-03 12:00:00")
  expect_floor_old_skool("day",    "2009-08-03 00:00:00")
  expect_floor_old_skool("week",   "2009-08-02 00:00:00")
  expect_floor_old_skool("month",  "2009-08-01 00:00:00")
  expect_floor_old_skool("year",   "2009-01-01 00:00:00")
})
```

## CRAN notes {#test-cran}

CRAN will run your tests on all CRAN platforms: Windows, Mac, and Linux.
There are a few things to bear in mind:

* Tests need to run relatively quickly - aim for under a minute.
  Place `skip_on_cran()` at the beginning of long-running tests that shouldn't
  be run on CRAN - they'll still be run locally, but not on CRAN.

> * ~Note that tests are always run in the English language (`LANGUAGE=EN`) and

Reviewer: This should would be a good place to explain `local_reproducible_output()`

  32-bit versions of R) so use `expect_equal()` rather than
  `expect_identical()`.

CRAN revision thought dump:

* Enrich description of platforms, i.e. say more than "Windows, Mac, Linux".
  The check flavors: <https://cran.r-project.org/web/checks/check_flavors.html>.

>   - Draw a line to how this determines which "flavors" a package should be

Reviewer: Mention r-hub

    checked on.
    Depends on how broad the user base is and the "trickiness" of the package's
    code (e.g. does it need compilation?).
    Do a cost benefit analysis.
    Connect that to which `usethis::use_github_action_check_*()` variant is
    appropriate.

> * How to decide whether to let a test run on CRAN.

Reviewer: Any test that depends on something that is not under your direct control is a candidate for skipping on CRAN.

  If the test can fail WITHOUT indicating a defect in your package that merits
  removal from CRAN, do not let CRAN run the test. Examples:
  - Accessing a website or API that could ever be down or have an
    occasional error (so: any website or API on planet earth).
  - Exact formatting of a message.

>   - File system work typical of an authentic user that touches files any where

Reviewer: If you have to write to a file use `withr::local_temp_file()`. This will protect you against 99% of the most likely problems and if new problems arise we can fix centrally in one location.

    but the R session's temp directory. This includes reading or writing the
    clipboard.
* How to prevent a test from running on CRAN.
  - `skip_on_cran()`, `skip_on_os()`
  - Default behaviour for snapshot tests
  - Keep in a separate repo

## Miscellaneous sections to (maybe) add

> 

Reviewer: Something about random numbers, `withr::local_seed()` etc.

### Mocking

> At the very least, I think we need to point to packages that handle this and outline situations when mocking is one of the reasonable approaches.

Reviewer: Brief description of what mocking is and a survey of the state of the art currently.

It's not actually a topic I want to get deeply into, because it feels pretty specialized and I don't think we have detailed, strongly held, stable opinions about it.

### Filesystem matters

Do not write into `tests/testthat/` during your tests.

The only place you should write into is session temp dir.

> Even then, best practice is to clean up any files or folder you create.

Reviewer: ONLY EVER USE `withr::local_temp_file()`. ALL OTHER PATHS LEAD TO PAIN AND SUFFERING

Ways to be build good paths:

* `testthat::test_path()`
* `fs::path_package()` and `system.file()`

### Namespace

You can call / test all of your own package's functions without any special effort on your part, regardless of whether they are exported or not.

That is provided at test time by `testhat::test_file()`, `devtools::test()`, etc.

During interactive development, you should make this happen for yourself via `devtools::load_all()`.

In general, testthat's official workflows are designed around the assumption that the user uses `devtools::load_all()`.

### Dependencies

Don't attach other packages from your tests.
Don't call `library()`.
Or, rather, that should be about as rare as using `Depends`.

If other package is in Imports, do `foo::fun()`, just like we recommend when you use it in functions below `R/`.

If other package is in Suggests, .... I already wrote about whether and how to guard in Metadata.Rmd.
Move that content?

### Introspection

`NOT_CRAN`, `skip_on_cran()`

`TESTTHAT`, `is_testing()`

`testing_package()`

> ### Test coverage

Reviewer: I think this should come much earlier since it's now a key part of my workflow.  Would be good in "what to test"

* What is test coverage?

> * Use covr to learn your test coverage.

Reviewer: Talk about binding `Cmd + R` to `devtools::test_coverage_local_file()` and running repeatedly while you're writing your tests.

* Use GitHub Actions to keep tabs on your test coverage.
* Test coverage should be "high", but going from 90% to 100% coverage is not

>   always the best use of your development time and energy.

Reviewer: Especially since the last 1% might require excessive gymnastics to cover. Don't sacrifice maintainability for covering some weird edge case that isn't that important.
